While you were in Washington with the
Oceanographic Office, how large did it become?
I left there in 1952 to go to Hawaii, and I honestly
can't answer that, because the Division of
Oceanography began very small, five people, as I
mentioned. But it was only one small portion of the
then Hydrographic Office. There was air
navigation. There was the chart construction
group, the print shops for navigation charts for
both the sea and aviation. And the Division of
Oceanography was a very small group. And it grew.
And by the time we left, I left, I'm sorry, 52. About
all I can remember, it must have been 200. Now, that
may be large. I'm not sure. It was while I was in
Hawaii that the decision was made to change the
name from the Navy Hydrographic Office to the Navy
Oceanographic Office. Interesting thing about
that group under Dr. Fleming is that a large
percentage of your Government oceanographers in
the United States came from there. Bob Abel, who
was the head of the Sea Grant program here with
NOAA. Murray Schaefer, oceanographer of the
Bureau of Ordnance.
Bill Littlewood, who became the science attache
in Copenhagen and then Tokyo and is now with AID in
the Middle East. Sidney Upham, who went with the
Navy Oceanographic Instrumentation Office. You
can just go right down the list. And I would say 80%
of the people that were with the Navy
Oceanographic Office who came out of school with a
degree in some of the natural sciences, but no
degrees in oceanography, have ended up in quite
responsible positions positions in
oceanography and academia and in the government.
Would you suggest that this is why? Because you
guys were the first people? Yeah, sure. Okay. I
can't think of any other reason, really, because
there were three places in the nation at that time
that, quote, turned out oceanographers, end
quote. That was Scripps. No, actually only two.
Scripps and the University of Washington in terms
of formal academic training. The University of
Washington only after Dick Fleming left the Navy
Oceanographic Office, then the Hydrographic
Office, and became the director of the Division of
Oceanography at the University of Washington.
Woods Hole did not turn out anybody in
oceanography because it was a research
institution. with interactions with MIT, it now
is a degree-granting organization. But that's
what I've lost touch, perhaps, in the last 10
years. So for all those years, there simply was no
place. You didn't have the big Institute of Marine
Sciences in Miami. In fact, I used to go to Dr.
Smith's lab out on Coral Island at the edge of Miami
where he was looking at the rate of fouling on
panels as a function of anti-fouling paints. He
brought that lab from himself up to a
multi-million dollar institution and it is now.
You didn't have Texas A&M oceanographically
speaking. You didn't have Oregon State.
When you decided to go to Hawaii,
why? Well, I don't want to go into the dramatic
experience of pulling, but I had accepted the job
to go there because I pretty well knew the people
and the work in Western Europe, from Scandinavian
countries to, say, Spain. So I wanted to go to
Hawaii so I could see the work being done in the
Orient. Also, because the man at that time, the
director of the lab in Hawaii, was Oscar Elton
Asete, who I looked at as one of the greatest of the
marine ecologists in terms of the fishes. In fact,
his whole thesis was that you could go from the wind
to the water, to the fish. And if you learned enough
about the meteorological events controlling the
water, you could go directly from the wind to the
fish, he used to say, and put the oceanographers
out of work. And the deputy director at that time
was one, Donald McKernan, who went to Alaska from
our lab in Hawaii and then became the director of
the Bureau of Commercial Fishers. To go to a place
like that where I was within 500 yards of the lab
from my home, I lived in faculty housing, had two
strong sons. I just seemed ideal because of the
wheelchair and because I hadn't quite learned how
to live in society yet after over a year. So Hawaii
had everything. challenging research in the
oceanography, descriptive oceanography of the
tropical Pacific. I could bring my background in
biology to bear in that I was to be in charge of an
oceanographic program that was concerned with
why the tuna fish lived where they lived and did
what they did, and to work with superb people in a
tropical paradise. My God, what more could a man
ask for?
You keep speaking of descriptive oceanography.
And it seems that's what you were primarily
involved in, in terms of descriptive
oceanography. But I noticed from your vita that
you did some of the primary work, for example, in
bringing a computer into oceanography, which
helps to change the nature of oceanography. Do you
have any explanation for that? Oh, I guess it was
just being where I was at the time that I got
interested in that. Descriptive oceanography is
really passe. At the time, I liked to think of
myself as a descriptive oceanographer along with
probably one of the best, Joe Reed, Val
Worthington at Woods Hole, Gary Metcalf at Woods
Hole. These were people who went to sea to describe
how the ocean looked. The fact that you had a
current flowing across the tropical that became
the Gulf Stream, that became the North Atlantic
current, that then returned back into this, and
here's this, as here goes the sea. That's
describing what the Gulf Stream looked like. So we
made hundreds of sections across the Gulf Stream
to see what the cold wall looked like and so forth.
Most of that was done with damn crude instruments.
We simply didn't have sophisticated electronic
instruments. And if we did, none of us knew how to
operate the damn thing anyway. Then I went with the
beer commercial fisheries in Hawaii, came back to
Washington, and then went to Miami. I began to
realize that the data we were collecting, we had
two big ships in Miami, the Geronimo and the
Undaunted, two big ATAs that we converted for
oceanographic and fishery research in the Gulf of
Guinea. And we were becoming swamped by the data.
We weren't able to keep up with the volume of the
data. We now had underway instruments, for
instance, that we hadn't had before. And then we
had one of the first of the salinity temperature
depth recorders in lieu of a Nansen bottle cast and
reversing thermometers. You lowered this damn
monster into the ocean, and on deck you got a record
of temperature salinity against the depth. So
while we were in Miami, the University of Miami,
which is also on Virginia Key, installed a
computer. And one of the leaders in its use was a man
by the name of Dr. Bill Richardson, who you may
recall drowned in the Gulf of Maine last year out on
an oceanographic cruise. And so he convinced me
that if I would support them with a few dollars that
we could develop computer programming that would
allow us to begin processing these data and make
them more amenable to auto
manipulation. And then I got an offer and went down
there in 65 and 67 as the director of the National
Oceanographic Data Center here in Washington. So
I came back to Washington again, where I always
seem to come no matter where the hell I go, took over
NODC and immediately was able to convince the
advisory board to provide us with the resources to
install a big, in those days, a big IBM 36040. And
from there on, we have just gotten bigger and
bigger and bigger. And right now, we have six
centers in EDS. We have one primarily concerned
with oceanographic data, one primarily
concerned with atmospheric buried the data, and
there we have records that go back to the early
1800s. And then one concerned with earthquakes,
sunspots, marine geology, angio-physics, and so
forth. So there's no way, for instance, at NCC in
Asheville, we have 126 million
sheets of weather observations, which if we did
not have those keypunches available on computer
technology. There would be no way we could, well,
this last winter, which was so atypical, because
of what we had there, we were able to go back and see.
You learn from the atypical, really, not from the
typical. 1917 and 18 were so much like this year
that it was unbelievable. Now, Jerome Nomias, a
man at Scripps, feels that the anomalies of
temperature in the North Pacific control the
weather patterns. And for what it's worth, in
August of 1917 and in August 1976, sea surface
temperatures in the North Pacific were five
degrees below the 100-year norms. And the jet
stream, the high altitude air flow, changed both
times to move the warm northern Pacific air masses
up to Alaska, and then swoop down into the eastern
United States and freeze the hell out of it. And in
both years, 1918 and 1977, the departures from the
mean temperatures in the southeastern United
States ran as much as 15 degrees. 1932 is the
warmest year in 100 years of records. and the sea
surface temperatures in the North Pacific the
previous August were well above the normals
available. So, what that means, I'm not sure. It
could be purely coincidence, but it sure is
suggestive that Jerome Neimias is right. Now,
when you first arrived at Florida, exactly what
was your job there? Well, you mean... I'm sorry,
I'm Hawaii. I want to drop back from Florida to
Hawaii. I was the chief of the oceanography
branch. I came there after a gentleman by the name
of Thompson Cromwell, about whom you may have
heard. He was killed in an airplane crash in Mexico
and was one of the most promising of the younger
oceanographers. And he's the one who discovered
equatorial undercurrent now called the Cromwell
Current in the Pacific. And he wanted to go back to
Scripps, so there was an opening at Hawaii. And as I
say, I was in Europe when the offer came, and I took
it. And then I had a year out until I went back, and
they very kindly held the job open for that whole
year. And what sort of... innovations or changes
did you try to make after you arrived at Hawaii?
What sort of things did you want your lab to do? Two
things, actually. The first thing I speak of
because I remember it so vividly. The lab opened in
1949. I went there in 1952. By that time, there were
about ten cruises between Hawaii and the
Marquesas Islands, areas south of the equator.
And through a variety of circumstances, none of
the data had ever been worked up. So my first job was
to prepare all of these data, quality control,
tabulate, and publish. So the first three years, I
guess, I spent with a group of very fine people. We
introduced ADP techniques in terms of key
punching and that type of equipment. We didn't
have a computer, but we had the ADP equipment. Then
we began looking at the data as it described the
oceans.
The tropical Pacific circulation is fascinating
because it's such a wide ocean compared to the
Atlantic with the bulge of Africa and the bulge of
South America. You have a beautiful east-west,
4,000 miles to work in. And the tunas were
distributed pretty damn well from the Baja
California to Hawaii across the Pacific. to the
Asiatic waters of the Japanese. And north of
Hawaii was the so-called transition zone between
the warm subtropical and the cold dilution waters
where the albacore lived. So we had the skipjack
tuna, the albacore tuna, and the elephant tuna.
And then there was a big skipjack fishery in
Hawaii. These fisheries change. One year it's
good, and the fishermen catch a lot of fish, and the
next year it's lousy. How come the difference? Do
they have a different migration path? Were the
eggs and a larvae of that year class impacted by a
bad year in terms of the temperatures and length of
the year? For instance, the albacore moved from
the Oregon fishery across the whole North Pacific
in one season and entered the Japanese longline
fishery. They moved across the transition zone,
we found out ultimately, because that's where the
soury, a little fish that the albacore eat, lives.
Most all animals have a zone. of conditions, let's
just say temperature, salinity, oxygen, you can
think of other things, that's optimum. So the
maximum number of the animals are in this zone and
then you get fewer and fewer and fewer and fewer.
Okay, if this is where the food of the albacore live
and I'm an albacore here and I want to get here, I'm
going to move right through there the whole damn
way across because that's where I can find food.
You find fish where they can make a living. So we
were in an area that was unexplored. The tropical
Pacific was essentially unknown in a descriptive
oceanography sense. Equatorial undercurrent,
equatorial countercurrent, the upwelling. How
long after the upwelling, the cool, deep waters
come to the surface loaded with nutrients. So you
begin to get development of phytoplankton,
zooplankton, the forage organisms, and
concentrations of the tunas. We didn't know. It
was an exciting time for a person with my kind of a
background, because it was all new. And calculus,
forget it. I wouldn't have gotten through
calculus in graduate school My wife had them in a
math major. So descriptive oceanography, you
have to have kind of an innate curiosity. Why does A
follow B, and why does B follow C, and what happens
if A doesn't happen in terms of B and C? Okay, you go
out and you plan a series of observations, and you
watch these things change, and you say, ha-ha. But
you don't sit down and use integral and
differential calculus, which is a beautiful way
now to do things, because you have massive
computers into which you can feed models of the
ocean. And then you can ask the computer, if I
change A, what will happen to B? Or if I reverse A,
what happens to B and C? have now gone from the
descriptive to the analytical, I think, in the
marine sciences. You're now beginning to ask,
what is the sequence of events and how fast do they
happen? How much warm water is carried in the Gulf
Stream from the tropical Atlantic into the
temperate? What's the impact of the climate? What
would happen if the Gulf Stream would slow down or
speed up? These things, now you can... Well, the
Von Arxes and the Stommels and the Smagorinskys
and others can begin looking at these in the big
computers.
How long were you in Hawaii? Ten years, almost to
the day. And while there, did you seem to feel as if
after ten years your work there had completed?
Yeah, there was a combination of a lot of
circumstances actually. After ten years hearing
each of us give the same papers over again, only in a
slightly modified form, I felt somewhat isolated
from the marine oceanographic, which is a
redundancy, the marine community of scientists,
because it was not easy for me to travel. That was
the personal aspect of it. 1961, my son was old
enough, we took off. We went to England and we spent
six weeks in Europe. And from that time on, I have
gone to oceanographic meetings and delegations
was the chairman of one of the major committees of
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission ever since. I've gone to Europe at
least two times a year ever since. You were in
Helsinki though in 1960, were you not? Yeah.
Didn't you go to work in the International
Conference there? Is that when your son went with
you? Yes, yes, yes. I said 61. I'm wrong. Oh, okay. I
guess it was 19... Well, I may be wrong. No, it was
either 60 or 61. He and I took off and went to the
International Union for Geodesy and Geophysics
in Helsinki. Then we went to every major
oceanographic lab between Helsinki and Lisbon.
Now, is this the first time you've become
seriously interested in international
cooperation among oceanographers? I think so. I
was interested prior to that. I was in Europe when I
was exposed to polio. So I had been with the IUGG,
but I guess that's when I first realized I wanted to
do more than I was doing. We went to Copenhagen. to
the organizational meeting of the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission,
at which time I had a chance to interact with George
Deacon and Roger Revelle and Secretary Wakelin
and people that I had heard about but hadn't had an
opportunity to really interact with. Warren
Wooster, Dr. Bernica from Hamburg, all of these
people. I became really excited, began going as a
member, as an observer to the delegations, then as
a member. Then when I became, I became involved in
the planning of a 14-nation
oceanographic survey of the tropical Atlantic
called ICITA. And we got together the ships from
each of the nations, our own included, and had a
midwinter and a midsummer survey from Africa to
South America on and to the Gulf and Caribbean. And
other than in the ocean, that was the first major
cooperative international oceanographic
survey. And I made so many friends. just became so
thoroughly captivated with the idea of working
with these people. For instance, in West Africa,
Sierra Leone, Republic of Ivory Coast,
Congo-Brazzaville, a nation. My first
experience of the problems between the black
people and the Portuguese, and I began to realize
that international oceanography I can remember
we were in Abidjan in the Republic of Ivory Coast,
and in our hotel was a bowling alley. And my son and I
went down, and here was two people from East
Germany, and
two people from Kiel in West Germany, three people
from the USSR,
Mario from Portugal,
several nations, all around a big table, eating
hot dogs and hamburgers. And they had an eggs and
larvae bowling team and the adult fish bowling
team. And on the way back to the hotel, my son said,
Dad, you know. If oceanographers could run the
governments of the world, there would be no
problems. You've never seen such a mixture of
people as far as their political beliefs, at least
in terms of the national postures we're
concerned. East Germany, West Germany, USSR,
Portugal, the black Africans, United States,
Canada. We just had a ball there. In fact, they I
think perhaps we got more oceanography done as a
result of that. Do you think that international
cooperation was even possible before 57 and the
IGY? Tom? Sure. I think through the International
Union for Geology and Geophysics and the
International Council of Scientific Unions, a
group called YAPSO, the International
Association for Physical Oceanographers. Yeah,
sure. It was somewhat of a different type of
cooperation, though. It was people gathering to
hear each other give learned papers and be totally
bored, of course, but this compared to bringing
together other ships of lots of nations
exchanging the scientists on ships, exchanging
equipment,
the data management problems. It was this type of
international cooperation that was the result of
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission. You see, there's the international
aspects, like ICSU, International Council for
Scientific Unions. That's international. The
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission,
the World Meteorological Organization, the Food
and Agricultural Organization are technical
bodies of the United Nations and are
intergovernmental. When you go to one of those
meetings as a member of the delegation, you speak
for your nation and commit resources for your
nation. When you go to an international meeting,
you don't. You are gathering as a group of
scientists to exchange ideas. So there's a big
difference there.
And you were active, really, in terms of
international cooperation, and I assume still
are from 1960 on. Did it seem to you that
international cooperation blossomed and grew in
this period? Well, it changed. A little difficult
to explain when or how, but if we go back to 1953,
1963, the International Cooperative
Investigations of the Tropical Atlantic, that
was the first of a series of intergovernmental
oceanographic commission-coordinated
activities. The intergovernmental...
investigations of the Kirishio, the IIOE, the
Intergovernmental Investigations of the Indian
Ocean, the
The CCAR, the IOC-coordinated cooperative
investigations of the Caribbean and adjacent
regions, that was in the descriptive
oceanography phase when nations brought their
resources together because no one nation could
look at the whole tropical Atlantic at once. We
don't do that anymore because we don't really need
that anymore. I'm not saying we know enough about
the oceans. I am saying that you no longer can
generally bring together ships and scientists
from six, eight, ten nations into these types of
operations. We don't have the need or the
resources. We're now beginning to look at the
regional problems, and we're beginning to bring
scientists together to look at things like a mole.